[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
roger johnson and nina warhurst hello
good morning our headlines today the row
over schools intensifies
a number of councils joined teaching
unions in calling for a delay in primary
pupils returning on mass
in england but the chair of the
education select committee
warns that children could suffer
absolutely where possible
we should keep our schools opening we
are damaging
our young children's life chances
city leaders in liverpool go one step
further and demand a national lockdown
race to protect the vulnerable hundreds
of sites across the uk get ready to roll
out the oxford vaccine
good morning have arsenal turn the
corner well a convincing victory at a
snowy hawthorns makes it three league
wins in a row for mikhail arteta's site
good morning it's a day of sunshine and
showers and although it's not going to
feel it the air is a tiny bit less cold
today that means many of the showers
will come through
as rain they'll be most frequent for
eastern scotland eastern areas of
england but i'll have a full forecast
coming up
a little bit later on
[Music]
good morning it's sunday the 3rd of
january our top story today some
councils and
teaching unions in england are
continuing to power pressure on the
government
calling for primary schools to be kept
closed to the majority of pupils
after the christmas holidays teaching
unions have told primary school staff it
is unsafe to return to work because of
rising coronavirus cases
but writing in the sunday telegraph the
head of ofsted amanda spielman
warns time away from the classroom
should be kept to the absolute minimum
our political correspondent chris mason
has more
this is brighton where primary schools
were due to reopen this week
after the christmas holidays but now the
local authority is advising
that they shouldn't and has asked the
education secretary
to intervene too we've written to gavin
williamson
to ask him to close our primary schools
in line with the decision that he's made
in london other areas but what we've
also
done is written to schools directly
ourselves and asked them
to or advise them that we think the
right decision is for them to move to
remote learning
on monday and only be open for children
of key workers and
our most vulnerable children as well and
this
is birmingham where the city council has
said it will support
any primary school head teachers who
decide to shift to learning from home
and this morning local leaders in
liverpool are calling for another
national lockdown they argue the current
tiers system in england isn't working
we feel that you know to curb this virus
particularly with the new strain
it's really important that we tackle it
head-on
and that we're proactive rather than
reactive when things get really bad
and that a lockdown would help to
resolve that the government's default
position is that schools in england
should remain open wherever possible
but with some local authorities saying
that schools should close and the
biggest teaching union
telling its members that it's not safe
for them to go to work
what happens next is not entirely in
ministers hands
how many more councils could suggest
schools close
for most pupils how many teachers
will turn up in classrooms union leaders
are in touch with one another this
weekend
coordinating their actions the
department for education says it will
only move to remote schooling as a
last resort the pandemic robbed us of
many things in 2020
not least certainty it's going to do the
same thing again
for many parents and pupils for the
first few months of this year
at least chris mason bbc news let's talk
to our political correspondent jonathan
blake who joins us some councils going
against orders to keep schools open the
teaching union's launching legal action
jonathan
it's a busy morning for for the
government it'd be interesting to hear
what the prime minister has to say on
the andrew marr
program later it certainly will roger
he'll be
facing questions about this and many
other things i'm sure and
as you say it is a tricky and uncertain
situation
for children parents teachers school
staff
and more this morning as things stand
most primary schools
in england are due to open tomorrow to
all pupils but as we've seen in the last
few days the government has shifted its
position and has now moved to keep all
primaries
in london closed to most children while
the children of key workers
and those deemed to be vulnerable will
still be able to attend with
most others engaging in online learning
the unions joining forces urging the
government
in various forms to make that the
default across england
and some local authorities as you say
taking things into their own hands as
well as you saw in chris's report there
we have this timely intervention this
morning from the chief inspector
of ofsted england's school inspectorate
anna
spielmann who is saying that we can't
furlough
young people's learning or wider
development
amanda spellman i should say somebody
else who
is broadly of that opinion is the mp
robert halfon who chairs the house of
commons schools select committee
absolutely where possible we should keep
our schools
opening we are damaging our young
children's life chances
we know that during the last lockdown
millions of children did hardly any
learning
at all um whatever remote learning
um goes on it is patchy in parts
hundreds of thousands of vulnerable
children or disadvantaged children still
don't have proper computers
at home nothing is a substitute for
being at school
now the department for education is
stressing that schools will continue to
implement safety measures to contain the
spread
of coronavirus in schools but it does
say we'll move to remote education as
a last resort is the result of all this
pressure
now meaning that the government will
have no option but to view that last
resort as the action that it has to take
as you suggest the prime minister will
face questions on this
and other topics to do with the
government's coronavirus response on the
andrew marr programme
in an hour or so jonathan thank you over
on bbc one
the nhs is preparing to roll out the new
oxford astrazeneca vaccine tomorrow at a
small number of hospitals around the uk
as the health service begins ramping up
the biggest immunization programme in
its history
pressure is mounting to protect millions
more vulnerable people amid concerns
of a new variant of coronavirus which is
spreading out of control
our health correspondent catherine de
costa has this report
some of the first precious doses of a
life-saving vaccine
the princess royal hospital in west
sussex is one of a small number of
hospitals that will begin inoculating
people with the oxford vaccine tomorrow
before the rollouts extended to more
than 700 sites
later in the week we're really pleased
to be one of the early
sort of areas that will be giving this
vaccine because we know it's going to
protect people protect our staff
and it's the thing that's going to help
us manage this pandemic unlike the
pfizer jab the oxford vaccine can be
stored in a fridge
making it much easier to distribute to
hundreds of gp
surgeries vaccination centers and care
homes
the elderly are most at risk from the
virus that's why the focus is to
vaccinate most care home residents and
staff by the end of the month
margaret keenan became the first person
in the world to receive the fisa vaccine
outside of clinical trials nearly a
month ago
since then nearly a million people have
had their first dose
now armed with the oxford vaccine the
race is on to protect
30 million of the most vulnerable
including nhs frontline workers
many of whom now worn out having battled
the virus for nearly a year
only to see it threatening to overwhelm
the health service once again
i know it's going to be worse that's the
only thing we know i know that we're
massively stretched at the moment our
nursing numbers are diluted the staff
are exhausted on intensive care
and we've got a long way more to go
before we hit the peak
for now there's still no let up in sight
yesterday saw another record high
with more than 57 000 new cover cases
recorded
the nhs is bracing itself for even
greater pressure
in the weeks ahead vaccines though bring
hope
this virus can be defeated catherine de
costa
bbc news the shadow culture secretary
joe stevens is being treated in hospital
for covid19
a statement about the 54 year old labour
mp was released on her twitter feed last
night
where her team thanked people for their
good wishes sakir stama has described
her as a dear colleague and friend
and wished her well rescuers in norway
have found a fourth body
at the site of a massive landslide near
oslo emergency teams are still searching
for several people who've been missing
since the hillside collapsed
on the village of ask on wednesday
freezing conditions are hindering the
progress
of the operation
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news